---
layout: post
title:  "There are no mistakes, only happy little accidents"
date:   2020-05-20
excerpt: "<b> | Coding | School  |</b> <br/> Part I of Operating Systems (15-410) and my experience"
image: "/images/pic_01_post.jpg"
---


### Part I of Operating Systems (15-410) and my experience

<blockquote>
Experience is what you get when you don't get what you want.
</blockquote>

In what you might call a deliberate rashness, I took the infamous OS class (15-410) in school, overloading it together with other CS classes like 15-451 and 15-259 to name some. This OS class is often said to be easily one of the hardest systems courses in school, described as traumatic by some and but also rewarding by others. In this blog post, I'd like to recount some valuable personal reflections and learning points I had from this class.

More technical discussions will be deferred to another post.

<hr/>

### There are no mistakes, only happy little accidents
A few weeks into the class and about Project 1 (the second project since its 0 indexed), I encountered a double fault while trying to install some interrupt handlers in the Interrupt Descriptor Tables. 

For those who are not acquainted with jargon, a double fault is almost like euphemism for unfortunate tragedy. Like train wreck bad kind of tragedy. A very apt metaphor would be that it is like crashing your car and watching another car slam right into it to make it 10 times worse.

But the engineer in me will try to explain it here (skip if uninterested): a double fault means that while the operating system is running, it ran into an exception and while that exception was being handled, a second exception was raised. While an average PC would just crash and burn, the OS simulator platform Simics we are using panics and dumps purple pixie dust all over the screen. And hangs of course.

I flip through the 40 page project handout. And to my surprise -- lo and behold clear and succinct step by step instructions on how to solve that nasty double/ triple fault. And I directly quote what was in the handout below: 


>- First, take a moment to smile. If you had been running your kernel on a real PC, it would have suddenly cleared the screen, beeped, and rebooted. You would have no way to figure out what had happened aside from comparing your source code to a previous version and reasoning forward from there. In 15-410, you have thousands of dollars of the world's best PC simulation software at your beck and call. So maybe as you smile you should remind yourself how grateful you are to the Simics developers.
> <p></p>
>-  Now, take a second moment to smile. A triple fault means you are about to learn something! What's more, it's the kind of learning you can't get from books. Maybe you will learn something about the x86, something about OS structure, or something about debugging strategy
> <p></p>
>Q: Ok Mr Miyagi, enough telling me how to polish the car, can you give me some actual advice about my triple fault already?
> <p></p>
>A: Ah, grasshopper, you are in such a hurry...
><br>

I took a bitter aside moment to curse in the 3 languages I speak, before going back to the "purple screen of sadness".

Cliched, but I think unsurpsingly this was perhaps one of the most useful advice going forward.

<hr/>

### Mr Miyagi's pearls of wisdom

Of course the "worst" of this class was yet to come and was definitely during the last weeks of the Kernel Project, where we are tasked to build our own kernels from scratch in groups of two. And we were faced with our hurdle:

- Bugs can be anywhere in the miniscule gaps of interleaving multithreaded code.
- Code is complete; (bad news) passes most *but* not all test cases.

We were so close yet so far. Looming checkpoints and deadlines,  prodded my work partner and I into a seemingly never ending flurry of arguments and disagreements. A week before the submission deadline, I couldn't even recall how it was like having a peaceful discussion, joking and laughing about small mistakes here and there. The friction between us could probably have started mankind's first promethean flame.

But at one point in time, we decided to consult our TA for some help with a bug we are facing with unexpected behavior from our printf code. I was truthfully grabbing at the ends of the few strands of hair I have left, but as we explained our code to the TA, I remember, he gasped,


"Now, that's interesting".


I recalled how our TA laughed and pointed out some weird behaviour of the console that he wasn't sure about. Half an hour later, we figured that we had totally forgotten to restore some of the caller saved registers (%esi etc.) in our syscall stub functions.  This still allowed most of the stubs to work most of the time, but in more elaborate functions like printf where registers like %esi are used, unsightly symptoms began showing up.

But that's besides the point. For a moment when he first pointed out some of our mistakes. I was surprised. Not because of the unexpected behaviour of the system etc. but because it was a *ultra rare* smile at an error. It was so long since we rejoiced at a mistake. 

That night, I had a long overdue discussion with my partner and we admitted that we lost that spark of enthusiasm we had when we first started out on our project, amidst the tireless strive for perfection. And I think that was when we lost sight of the goal.

Initially I would start out the day happily staring at the simics debugger and end the day contentedly (and perhaps dumbly) staring at the same bug I still had no idea about. I was excited and looking forward to each new day where I got stuck and un-stucked myself. I had fun.


This was what reminded me of the very first advice from the triple fault page.

>1. First, take a moment to smile.

Mr Miyagi was right.

<hr/>
### x Days After
After that meeting with our TA, we decided to change our attitudes approaching this project. Things lightened up a lot and we were much much more productive than before. Attitude and mindset towards solving problems were really impact multipliers.

Most people think they learn how to be more resilient in the face of bugs, or learn how to not make those stupid mistakes in the first place, but I think for me one of the valuable life lesson I learnt from this class is how to laugh and smile when I face a problem. 

Afterall, this is when we actually get to learn.

<hr/>
### x Days Before

To be honest, I was very nervous about taking this class in sophomore spring, and I remember having multiple (almost similar) conversations with my partner multiple times on whether I was prepared for this class.

"Do you think I'm ready for this?"

"You won't know until you do it. And while you're doing it, you might as well give it your best shot."

"Hmmm, what if I'm not ready for this?"

"..."

In hindsight, not all moments of rashness are bad. And I'm really glad I took a leap of faith in this class.